# 数学

Data importation and manipulation 输入、操作 Pre requisites 先修科目；前提条件 Permutation 序列 association Hierarchical models 分层模型 Screencast Webcast Podcast Alumnus Alumna Self explanatory 自解 Successional consecutive 开区间 \(0,1\), not compact, bounded, open 实数集 R, open, closed, not compact, not bounded 整数集 Z, closed, not compact, not bounded Pedagogical 教育学的 Precedent 范例 （procedure） Analogous 相似的 Surrogate 替代 = substitute Regiment 团 大量的人/物 regimen 食物疗法 养生法 Fluctuate 变动 Ubiquitous 无处不在的 Asymptotic 渐近的 Dystopia Null hypothesis null distribution Alternate hypotheses Normal Approximation 正态近似 Empirical cumulative distribution 经验累积分布图 \(or empirical cdf or empirical distribution function\) （the function F\(a\) for any a, which tells you the proportion of the values which are less than or equal to a.）

句子 We\`re going to briefly look at the results presented in a paper. This journal here, Diabetes, and we can see that this paper is reporting on an experiment that involves mice and feeding them different diets. And one of the conclusions we see in the abstract right away is that body weight was higher in mice that were fed the high-fat diet already after the first week, so that is a scientific conclusion. So if you go down further to the results section, where they convince us that that’s the case, you see things like body weight was 16.3 plus or minus 0.1. High-throughput technologies have changed basic biology and the biomedical sciences from data poor disciplines to data intensive ones. A specific example comes from research fields interested in understanding gene expression. Gene expression is the process in which DNA, the blueprint for life, is copied into RNA, the templates for the synthesis of proteins, the building blocks for life. In the 1990s, the analysis of gene expression data amounted to spotting black dots on a piece of paper or extracting a few numbers from standard curves. With high-throughput technologies such as microarrays this suddenly changed to sifting through tens of thousands of numbers. Biologists went from using their eyes or simple summaries to categorize results to having thousands \(and now millions\) of measurements per sample to analyze. Here we will learn about the statistical techniques that have been widely used with these technologies.

Because there is a vast number of public datasets, we use many gene expression examples but the statistical techniques you will learn have also proven useful in other fields that make use of high throughput technologies. Technologies such as microarrays, next generation sequencing, fRMI, and mass spectrometry all produce data to answer questions for which what we learn here will be indispensable. The specific topics we will learn are inference in the context of high-throughput data, modeling including Bayesian/hierarchical models and advanced exploratory data analysis.

